Add Gitpod reference architecture (#2106)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/reference-architecture/_chunks/cluster.md

| Max Nodes                 | 1                                                                                                           |
| Addons                    | HorizontalPodAutoscaling,<br/>NodeLocalDNS,<br/>NetworkPolicy                                               |
| Region                    | Choose your [region and zones](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones)                         |

```
CLUSTER_NAME=gitpod
REGION=us-central1
GKE_VERSION=1.21.11-gke.900

gcloud container clusters \\
    create "${CLUSTER_NAME}" \\
    --disk-type="pd-ssd" --disk-size="50GB" \\
    --image-type="UBUNTU_CONTAINERD" \\
    --machine-type="e2-standard-2" \\
    --cluster-version="${GKE_VERSION}" \\
    --region="${REGION}" \\
    --service-account "${GKE_SA_EMAIL}" \\
    --num-nodes=1 \\
    --no-enable-basic-auth \\
    --enable-autoscaling \\
    --enable-autorepair \\
    --no-enable-autoupgrade \\
    --enable-ip-alias \\
    --enable-network-policy \\
    --create-subnetwork name="gitpod-${CLUSTER_NAME}" \\
    --metadata=disable-legacy-endpoints=true \\
    --max-pods-per-node=110 \\

>     --default-max-pods-per-node=110 \\

Reviewer: is that always the default, or could this be changed in a GCP project?

    --min-nodes=0 \\
    --max-nodes=1 \\
    --addons=HorizontalPodAutoscaling,NodeLocalDNS,NetworkPolicy
```

Unfortunately, you cannot create a cluster without the default node pool. Since we need a custom node pool, you need to remove the default one.

```
gcloud --quiet container node-pools delete default-pool \\
    --cluster="${CLUSTER_NAME}" --region="${REGION}"
```

> Now, we are [creating a **node pool**](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/node-pools) **for the Gitpod services**.

Reviewer 2: We should not delete the default node pool and recreate it.
Insted, it is better to configure the default node pool to be the "service" node pool. 
That's how @nandajavarma does it in Terraform:
see https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/pull/10365#discussion_r890009266
see https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/blob/dbd8d6b3b3bd8275553c0f62aae06a7dba9e63e4/install/infra/terraform/gke/main.tf#L62

Reviewer 3: According to my somewhat stale recollection, it's a [best practice](https://github.com/terraform-google-modules/terraform-google-kubernetes-engine/issues/15) to delete the [default node pool](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/hardening-your-cluster#use_least_privilege_sa); the default node pool is bound to the default GCP compute service account which has broad permissions, and the service account is bound to the nodes at creation and cannot be changed afterwards.

There are a couple of other variables on this. One, there is [GKE Workload Identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity), which may remove the risk of pods running on a node getting access to the node's service account. Two, we are specifying a different service account when calling `gcloud container clusters create` which _should_ apply to the default node pool, but I'm not observing that behavior on my test clusters.

As mentioned on the prior PR I'm running off knowledge of GKE that might be quite stale, so this could be totally fine and a best practice to keep the default node pool.

Regardless of the decision, this should be documented - if I'm running off of old knowledge then customers may have the same question so having this decision documented will let us skip that conversation.

| Image Type        | `UBUNTU_CONTAINERD`                                                                 |
| Machine Type      | `n2-standard-4`                                                                     |
| Enable            | Autoscaling<br/>Autorepair<br/>IP Alias<br/>Network Policy                          |
| Disable           | Autoupgrade<br/>`metadata=disable-legacy-endpoints=true`                            |
| Create Subnetwork | `gitpod-${CLUSTER_NAME}`                                                            |
| Number of nodes   | 1                                                                                   |
| Min Nodes         | 1                                                                                   |
| Max Nodes         | 50                                                                                  |
| Max Pods per Node | 110                                                                                 |
| Scopes            | `gke-default`,<br/>`https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite`        |
| Region            | Choose your [region and zones](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones) |

> | Node Labels       | `gitpod.io/workload_meta=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_ide=true`                   |

Reviewer 2: Node config should be the same as here: https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/blob/dbd8d6b3b3bd8275553c0f62aae06a7dba9e63e4/install/infra/terraform/gke/main.tf#L64

    --disk-type="pd-ssd" \\
    --disk-size="100GB" \\
    --image-type="UBUNTU_CONTAINERD" \\
    --machine-type="n2-standard-4" \\
    --num-nodes=1 \\
    --no-enable-autoupgrade \\
    --enable-autorepair \\
    --enable-autoscaling \\
    --metadata disable-legacy-endpoints=true \\
    --scopes="gke-default,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite" \\
    --node-labels="gitpod.io/workload_meta=true,gitpod.io/workload_ide=true,gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services=true" \\
    --max-pods-per-node=110 \\
    --min-nodes=1 \\
    --max-nodes=50 \\
    --region="${REGION}"
```

We are also creating a **node pool for the Gitpod workspaces**.

|                   |                                                                                                                                                 |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Image Type        | `UBUNTU_CONTAINERD`                                                                                                                             |

> | Machine Type      | `n2-standard-4`                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: Earlier in the doc we say this is `n2-standard-8`, don't we? 
I think it should be `n2-standard-8` because 4 vCPU is filled up by workspaces too quickly.

Reviewer: cc @aledbf

Reviewer 4: The question is, will this be used for Java workspaces? If that's the case, `n2-standard-8` is small.

| Enable            | Autoscaling,<br/>Autorepair,<br/>IP Alias,<br/>Network Policy                                                                                   |
| Disable           | Autoupgrade<br/>`metadata=disable-legacy-endpoints=true`                                                                                        |
| Create Subnetwork | `gitpod-${CLUSTER_NAME}`                                                                                                                        |
| Number of nodes   | 1                                                                                                                                               |
| Min Nodes         | 1                                                                                                                                               |
| Max Nodes         | 50                                                                                                                                              |

> | Max Pods per Node | 110                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: is that always the default, or could this be changed in a GCP project?

> | Max Pods per Node | 110                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: Also, this is not about simplicity, but about being explicit

| Scopes            | `gke-default`,<br/>`https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite`                                                                    |
| Region            | Choose your [region and zones](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones)                                                             |
| Node Labels       | `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless=true` |

```
gcloud container node-pools \\
    create "workload-workspaces" \\
    --cluster="${CLUSTER_NAME}" \\
    --disk-type="pd-ssd" \\
    --disk-size="100GB" \\
    --image-type="UBUNTU_CONTAINERD" \\
    --machine-type="n2-standard-4" \\
    --num-nodes=1 \\
    --no-enable-autoupgrade \\
    --enable-autorepair \\
    --enable-autoscaling \\
    --metadata disable-legacy-endpoints=true \\
    --scopes="gke-default,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite" \\
    --node-labels="gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular=true,gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless=true" \\

>     --max-pods-per-node=110 \\

Reviewer 2: I think we can remoe "Max Pods per Node" for the sake of simplicity because it's the default.

Reviewer: is that always the default, or could this be changed in a GCP project?

---
layout: false
---

<script lang="ts">
  import CloudPlatformToggle from "$lib/components/docs/cloud-platform-toggle.svelte";
</script>

The heart of this reference architecture is a **Kubernetes cluster** where all Gitpod components are deployed to. This cluster consists of two node pools:

1. **Services Node Pool**: On these nodes, the Gitpod “app” with all its services are deployed to. These services provide the users with the dashboard and manages the provisioning of workspaces.
2. **Workspaces Node Pool**: On the workspace nodes, Gitpod deploys the actual workspaces (where the actual developer work is happening). Because workspaces have vastly differing resource and security isolation requirements compared to Gitpod’s own services, they run on a dedicated node pool.

To enforce that the Gitpod components are scheduled to the proper node pools, you need to assign the following labels to the node pools:

> | Node Pool            | Labels                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 5: Hey @corneliusludmann 

We might want to consider introducing a headless pool, too.

If we don't, a workspace node (with regular workspaces) could get saturated with prebuild workspaces (which generally use more CPU and disk) and make for a poor experience with the regular workspaces. 

We generally use the same node type on the prebuild pool as the workspace pool.

Also, we'd likely want image builds to run on the headless pool nodes, too.

| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Services Node Pool   | `gitpod.io/workload_meta=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_ide=true`                                                                               |
| Workspaces Node Pool | `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless=true` |

The following table gives an overview of the node types for the different cloud providers that are used by this reference architecture.

|                      | GCP             | AWS           |
| -------------------- | --------------- | ------------- |
| Services Node Pool   | `n2-standard-4` | `m6i.xlarge`  |

> | Workspaces Node Pool | `n2-standard-8` | `m6i.2xlarge` |

Reviewer 5: Hey @corneliusludmann for the saas on GCP, we're using `n2d-standard-16` both for workspaces (regular workspaces) and headless (prebuild workspaces). I recommend `-16`, instead of `-8`.

---
layout: false
---

<script lang="ts">
  

>   import PlatformComparison from "$lib/components/docs/platform-comparison.svelte"

Reviewer 6: Hey @corneliusludmann, I introduced the component for this file. Could you please test, if everything works as expected? If everything is fine, I can replace the remaining occurences 👍

Reviewer 6: Note: Once thats done, we need to think of removing the other toggle component 💭

  volumeSize: 300
  volumeType: gp3
  volumeIOPS: 6000
  volumeThroughput: 500
  ebsOptimized: true
  privateNetworking: true
  propagateASGTags: true
    tags:
    k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/enabled: "true"
    k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/gitpod: "owned"
  labels:
    gitpod.io/workload_meta: "true"
    gitpod.io/workload_ide: "true"
    iam:
    attachPolicyARNs: # EKS CNI Policy is needed for IP management
      - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
      - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy
      - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy
      - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/ElasticLoadBalancingFullAccess
      - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore
    withAddonPolicies:
    albIngress: true
    autoScaler: true
    cloudWatch: true
    certManager: true
    ebs: true

  - name: workspaces # identical as above, with the following differences
    instanceTypes: ["m6i.2xlarge"]
    minSize: 1
    maxSize: 10
    labels:
    gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular: "true"
    gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services: "true"
    gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless: "true"
```

</div>
</CloudPlatformToggle>

## Networking

> For each Gitpod installation, you need a **domain**. In this guide, we use `gitpod.example.com` as a placeholder for your domain. Gitpod also uses different subdomains for some components as well as dynamically for the running workspaces. That's why you need to configure your DNS server and your TLS certificates for your Gitpod domain to the following wildcards:

Reviewer 7: **suggestion:** For explicitness, consider a small note about why the domain is needed, I guess that it's cert related?

```
gitpod.example.com
*.gitpod.example.com
*.ws.gitpod.example.com
```

The entry point for all traffic is the `proxy` component which has a service of type `LoadBalancer` that allows inbound traffic on ports 80 (HTTP) and 443 (HTTPS) as well as port 22 (SSH access to the workspaces).

> In order to support SSH access (which is also needed to work with desktop IDEs), you need to create a **load balancer** capable of working with [L4 protocols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_4:_Transport_layer).

Reviewer 7: **Suggestion:** Add reference links to VS Code Desktop and JetBrains docs 🙏 

```suggestion
SSH access is required to work with desktop IDEs, such as [VS Code Desktop](/docs/ides-and-editors/vscode) and JetBrains via [JetBrains Gateway](/docs/ides-and-editors/jetbrains-gateway). To enable SSH, you'll need to create a **load balancer** capable of working with [L4 protocols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_4:_Transport_layer).
```

> In order to support SSH access (which is also needed to work with desktop IDEs), you need to create a **load balancer** capable of working with [L4 protocols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_4:_Transport_layer).

Reviewer 7: @iQQBot - This might be a good place to add some details from [internal document on SSH gateway setup](https://www.notion.so/gitpod/SSH-Gateway-Setup-Document-dce802de609640be9ddb3ceeedfd3359)

> In order to support SSH access (which is also needed to work with desktop IDEs), you need to create a **load balancer** capable of working with [L4 protocols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_4:_Transport_layer).

Author: Agreed. I think we should assume that SSH is always configured and should have s stronger disclaimer here.

> In order to support SSH access (which is also needed to work with desktop IDEs), you need to create a **load balancer** capable of working with [L4 protocols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model#Layer_4:_Transport_layer).

Reviewer 7: Added an issue for us to document, also #2238

Kinda also relates to: #2178

<CloudPlatformToggle id="cloud-platform-toggle-networking">
<div slot="gcp">

In this guide, we use [load balancing through a standalone network endpoint group (NEG)](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/standalone-neg). For this, the Gitpod proxy service will get the following annotation by default:

```
cloud.google.com/neg: '{"exposed_ports": {"80":{},"443": {}}}'
```

For Gitpod, we support Calico as CNI only. You need to make sure that you DO NOT use [GKE Dataplan V2](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/dataplane-v2). That means, don't add the `--enable-dataplane-v2` flag the during the cluster creation.

</div>
<div slot="aws">

It is suggested to create a dedicated VPC (and EKS instance) for Gitpod. eksctl can do this for you, but if VPCs have to be configured separately, follow eksctl’s [suggestions](https://eksctl.io/usage/vpc-configuration/).

- You also customize eksctl’s [vpc](https://eksctl.io/usage/vpc-subnet-settings/#custom-subnet-topology) creation to suit your existing configurations.

> The VPC has a public and private side. All managed node groups and Gitpod services run in the private side. Inbound access to the services is through ALB/ELB services auto-provisioned by AWS based on the configuration used (standard LoadBalancer roles or creation of an Ingress). If running a separate jump host or vpn endpoint, it should be deployed in the public interface.

Reviewer 7: Should this be "needs", also is the public and private relating to subnets?

```suggestion
The VPC needs public and private subnets. All managed node groups and Gitpod services run in the private side. Inbound access to the services is through ALB/ELB services auto-provisioned by AWS based on the configuration used (standard LoadBalancer roles or creation of an Ingress). If running a separate jump host or vpn endpoint, it should be deployed in the public interface.
```
